[Go SDK] Go SDK Exits Experimental (#15894)
apache/beam: website/www/site/content/en/blog/go-sdk-release.md

## Feature Support

At time of writing, the Go SDK is currently "Batteries Not Included".
This means that there are gaps or edge cases in supported IOs and transforms.
That said, the core of the SDK enables a great deal of the Beam Model for
custom user use, supporting following features:

* PTransforms
  * Impulse
  * Create
  * ParDo w/User DoFns
    * Iterable Side Inputs
    * Multiple Output emitters
    * Receive and Return Key Value pairs
    * EventTime
    * SplittableDoFns
  * GroupByKey and CoGroupByKey
  * CombineFns for use with Combine and CombinePerKey
  * Windowing
    * Global, Fixed intervals, Sliding windows, and Session
    * Aggregating over windowed PCollections w/GBKs or Combines.
  * Flatten
  * Partition
  * Composites
  * Cross Language Transforms
* Coders
  * Primitive Go types (ints, string, []bytes, and more)
  * Beam Schemas for Go Struct types (including struct, slice, and map fields)
  * Registering custom coders
* Metrics
  * PCollection metrics (ElementCount, Size Estimates)
  * Custom User Metrics
  * DoFn profiling metrics (coming in 2.35.0)
* Provided Built Transforms
  * Sum, Count, Min, Max, Top, Filter
  * Scalable TextIO Reading

> Upcoming features support roadmap, and known issues are discussed below.

Reviewer: I know it's discussed below, but I would say something like "in particular, we plan to support a much richer set of IO connectes via Beam's cross-language capabilities."

Author: I like it. Done.

## Feature Support

At time of writing, the Go SDK is currently "Batteries Not Included".
This means that there are gaps or edge cases in supported IOs and transforms.
That said, the core of the SDK enables a great deal of the Beam Model for
custom user use, supporting following features:

* PTransforms
  * Impulse
  * Create
  * ParDo w/User DoFns
    * Iterable Side Inputs
    * Multiple Output emitters
    * Receive and Return Key Value pairs
    * EventTime
    * SplittableDoFns
  * GroupByKey and CoGroupByKey
  * CombineFns for use with Combine and CombinePerKey
  * Windowing
    * Global, Fixed intervals, Sliding windows, and Session
    * Aggregating over windowed PCollections w/GBKs or Combines.
  * Flatten
  * Partition
  * Composites
  * Cross Language Transforms
* Coders
  * Primitive Go types (ints, string, []bytes, and more)
  * Beam Schemas for Go Struct types (including struct, slice, and map fields)
  * Registering custom coders
* Metrics
  * PCollection metrics (ElementCount, Size Estimates)
  * Custom User Metrics
  * DoFn profiling metrics (coming in 2.35.0)
* Provided Built Transforms
  * Sum, Count, Min, Max, Top, Filter
  * Scalable TextIO Reading

>   * Test Stream (for runners that support it.)

Reviewer 2: Are we comfortable promoting test stream while we still have it marked as experimental?

Author: Good point, I'll remove it from this list.

### Package Compatibility

The primary user packages will avoid changing in backwards incompatible ways for core features.
This is to be inline with Go's notion of the [`import compatibility rule`](https://research.swtch.com/vgo-import).

> If an old package and a new package have the same import path,
> the new package must be backwards compatible with the old package.

Exceptions to this policy are around newer, experimental, or in development features.
These are subject to change.
Such features will have a doc comment noting the experimental status, or be mentioned the change notes for a release.
For example, using `beam.WindowInto` with Triggers is currently experimental and may have the api changed in a future release. 

Primary user packages include:
* The main beam package `github.com/apache/beam/sdks/v2/go/pkg/beam`
* Sub packages under `.../transforms`, `.../io`, `.../runners`, and `.../testing`.

Generally, packages in the module other than the primary user packages are for framework use.
They are at risk of changing, though at this point, large breaking changes are unlikely.

### Known Issues

> DO NOT SUBMIT: include Known Issues w/ 2.33.0, and known features making 2.34.0 and 2.35.0  (side inputs, metrics queyrying, IOs, Direct Runner, Triggers, Test Stream,  Cross Language Transforms caveats)

Author: This is still being drafted, but at a certain point, it's necessary to get other eyes on it to make sure the right content is being covered. 
Per the email to the exit thread I'm gathering up the known issues today, and the DO NOT SUBMITs are to remind me to actually populate certain things.

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
-->

Apache Beam’s latest release, version [2.33.0](/get-started/downloads/), is the first official release of the long experimental Go SDK.
Built with the [Go Programming Language](https://golang.org/), the Go SDK joins the Java and Python SDKs as the third implementation of the Beam programming model.

<!--more-->

## Using the new Go SDK.

New users of the Go SDK can start using it in their Go programs by importing the main beam package:

```
import "github.com/apache/beam/sdks/v2/go/pkg/beam"
```

The next run of `go mod tidy` will fetch the latest stable version of the module.
Alternatively executing `go get github.com/apache/beam/sdks/v2/go/pkg/beam` will download it to the local module cache immeadiately, and add it to your `go.mod` file.

Existing users of the experimental Go SDK need to update to new `v2` import paths to start using the latest versions of the SDK.

> This is can be done by adding `v2` to the import paths, changing `github.com/apache/beam/sdks/go/`... to `github.com/apache/beam/sdks/v2/go/`... where applicable, and then running `go mod tidy`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This can be done by adding `v2` to the import paths, changing `github.com/apache/beam/sdks/go/`... to `github.com/apache/beam/sdks/v2/go/`... where applicable, and then running `go mod tidy`.
```

Further documentation on using the SDK is available in the [Beam Programming Guide](/documentation/programming-guide/), and in the package [Go Doc](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/apache/beam/sdks/v2/go/pkg/beam).

## Feature Support

At time of writing, the Go SDK is currently "Batteries Not Included".
This means that there are gaps or edge cases in supported IOs and transforms.
That said, the core of the SDK enables a great deal of the Beam Model for
custom user use, supporting following features:

* PTransforms
  * Impulse
  * Create
  * ParDo with user DoFns
    * Iterable side inputs
    * Multiple output emitters
    * Receive and return key-value pairs
    * SplittableDoFns
  * GroupByKey and CoGroupByKey
  * CombineFns for use with Combine and CombinePerKey
  * Flatten
  * Partition
  * Composite transforms
  * Cross language transforms

> * EventTime windowing

Reviewer 3: Is EventTime a special class in the Beam Go SDK, it not then lets go with:
```suggestion
* Event time windowing
```

Author: `beam.EventTime` is a special type value for beam event times. https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/apache/beam/sdks/v2/go/pkg/beam#EventTime

>   * Global, Fixed Interval, Sliding, and Session windows

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * Global, Interval, Sliding, and Session windows
```

>   * Aggregating over windowed PCollections with GroupByKeys or Combines.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * Aggregating over windowed PCollections with GroupByKeys or Combines
```

* Coders
  * Primitive Go types (ints, string, []bytes, and more)
  * Beam Schemas for Go Struct types (including struct, slice, and map fields)
  * Registering custom coders
* Metrics
  * PCollection metrics (element counts, size estimates)
  * Custom user metrics
  * Post job user metrics querying (coming in 2.34.0)
  * DoFn profiling metrics (coming in 2.35.0)
* Built-in transforms
  * Sum, count, min, max, top, filter
  * Scalable TextIO reading

Upcoming features support roadmap, and known issues are discussed below.
In particular, we plan to support a much richer set of IO connectors via Beam's cross-language capabilities.

## Releases

With this release, the Go SDK now uses [Go Modules](https://golang.org/ref/mod) for dependency management.
This makes it so users, SDK authors, and the testing infrastructure can all rely on the same versions of dependencies, making builds reproducible.
This also makes [validating Go SDK Release Candidates simple](/blog/validate-beam-release/#configuring-a-go-build-to-validate-a-beam-release-candidate).

> Versioned SDK worker containers are now built and [published](https://hub.docker.com/r/apache/beam_go_sdk/tags?page=1&ordering=last_updated), with the SDK using matched tagged versions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Versioned SDK worker containers are now built and [published](https://hub.docker.com/r/apache/beam_go_sdk/tags?page=1&ordering=last_updated), with the SDK using matching tagged versions.
```

Release notes will call out when the minimum version of the language changes.

### Package Compatibility

The primary user packages will avoid changing in backwards incompatible ways for core features.
This is to be inline with Go's notion of the [`import compatibility rule`](https://research.swtch.com/vgo-import).

> If an old package and a new package have the same import path,
> the new package must be backwards compatible with the old package.

Exceptions to this policy are around newer, experimental, or in development features and are subject to change.
Such features will have a doc comment noting the experimental status.
Major changes will be mentioned in the release notes.
For example, using `beam.WindowInto` with Triggers is currently experimental and may have the API changed in a future release.

Primary user packages include:
* The main beam package `github.com/apache/beam/sdks/v2/go/pkg/beam`
* Sub packages under `.../transforms`, `.../io`, `.../runners`, and `.../testing`.

Generally, packages in the module other than the primary user packages are for framework use and are at risk of changing.

### Known Issues

#### Batteries not included.

> * Current native transforms are undertested.
> * IOs may not be written to scale.
> * Go Direct Runner is incomplete and is not portable, prefer using the Python Portable runner, or Flink.
>   * Doesn't support side input windowing. [BEAM-13075](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/BEAM-13075)
>   * Doesn't serialize data, making it unlikely to catch coder issues [BEAM-6372](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/BEAM-6372)
>   * Can use other general improvements, and become portable [BEAM-11076](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/BEAM-11076)
> * Current Trigger API is under iteration and subject to change [BEAM-3304](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/BEAM-3304).
>   * API has a possible breaking change between 2.33.0 and 2.34.0, and may change again.
> * Support of the SDK on services, like Google Cloud Dataflow, remains at the service owner's discretion.
> * Need something?
>   * File a ticket in the [Beam JIRA](https://issues.apache.org/jira/issues/?jql=project%20%3D%20BEAM%20AND%20component%20%3D%20sdk-go) and,
>   * Email the [dev@beam.apache.org](mailto:dev@beam.apache.org?subject=%5BGo%20SDK%20Feature%5D) list!

Reviewer 3: Consider having consistent `.` usage.

Not sure how best to insert it when there is a JIRA tag, might be simplest to not have any as I have suggested below:
```suggestion
* Current native transforms are undertested
* IOs may not be written to scale
* Go Direct Runner is incomplete and is not portable, prefer using the Python Portable runner, or Flink
  * Doesn't support side input windowing [BEAM-13075](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/BEAM-13075)
  * Doesn't serialize data, making it unlikely to catch coder issues [BEAM-6372](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/BEAM-6372)
  * Can use other general improvements, and become portable [BEAM-11076](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/BEAM-11076)
* Current Trigger API is under iteration and subject to change [BEAM-3304](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/BEAM-3304).
  * API has a possible breaking change between 2.33.0 and 2.34.0, and may change again
* Support of the SDK on services, like Google Cloud Dataflow, remains at the service owner's discretion
* Need something?
  * File a ticket in the [Beam JIRA](https://issues.apache.org/jira/issues/?jql=project%20%3D%20BEAM%20AND%20component%20%3D%20sdk-go) and,
  * Email the [dev@beam.apache.org](mailto:dev@beam.apache.org?subject=%5BGo%20SDK%20Feature%5D) list!
```

#### Fixed in 2.34.0
  * `top.SmallestPerKey` was broken [BEAM-12946](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/BEAM-12946)
  * `beam.TryCrossLanguage` API didn't match non-Try version [BEAM-9918](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/BEAM-9918)
    * This is a breaking change if one was calling `beam.TryCrossLanguage`

#### Fixed in 2.35.0

>   * Non-global window Side Inputs don't match (correctness bug) [BEAM-11087](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/BEAM-11087)
>     * Until 2.35.0 it's not recommended to use Side Inputs that are not using the global window.
>   * DoFns using Side Inputs accumulate memory over bundles, causing OOMs [BEAM-13130](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/BEAM-13130)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * Non-global window side inputs don't match (correctness bug) [BEAM-11087](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/BEAM-11087)
    * Until 2.35.0 it's not recommended to use side inputs that are not using the global window.
  * DoFns using side inputs accumulate memory over bundles, causing out of memory issues [BEAM-13130](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/BEAM-13130)
```

## Roadmap

The [SDK roadmap](/roadmap/go-sdk/) has been updated.
Ongoing focus is to bolster streaming focused features, improve existing connectors, and make connectors easier to implement.

> In the nearer term this comes in the form of improvements to Side Inputs, and providing wrappers and improving ease-of-use for Cross Language Transforms from Java.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the nearer term this comes in the form of improvements to side inputs, and providing wrappers and improving ease-of-use for cross language transforms from Java.
```

```
import "github.com/apache/beam/sdks/v2/go/pkg/beam"
```

The next run of `go mod tidy` will fetch the latest stable version of the module.
Alternatively executing `go get github.com/apache/beam/sdks/v2/go/pkg/beam` will download it to the local module cache immeadiately, and add it to your `go.mod` file.

Existing users of the experimental Go SDK need to update to new `v2` import paths to start using the latest versions of the SDK.
This is can be done by adding `v2` to the import paths, changing `github.com/apache/beam/sdks/go/`... to `github.com/apache/beam/sdks/v2/go/`... where applicable, and then running `go mod tidy`.

Further documentation on using the SDK is available in the [Beam Programming Guide](/documentation/programming-guide/), and in the package Go Doc at https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/apache/beam/sdks/v2/go/pkg/beam.

## Feature Support

At time of writing, the Go SDK is currently "Batteries Not Included".
This means that there are gaps or edge cases in supported IOs and transforms.
That said, the core of the SDK enables a great deal of the Beam Model for
custom user use, supporting following features:

> * PTransforms

Reviewer 3: I would consider only capitalizing the first word in this list except where we are using DoFns, ParDo, GroupByKey, CoGroupByKey, SplittableDoFn, PCollection,

  * Impulse
  * Create
  * ParDo w/User DoFns
    * Iterable Side Inputs
    * Multiple Output emitters
    * Receive and Return Key Value pairs

>     * EventTime

Author: Not particularly, I renamed the windowing section to "EventTime windowing" instead.

Likely the origin was while the framework is dealing with event time via windowing, the user deals with event time in DoFns.

    * SplittableDoFns
  * GroupByKey and CoGroupByKey
  * CombineFns for use with Combine and CombinePerKey

>   * Windowing

Reviewer 3: Should windowing be at the same level as PTransforms (unindent Windowing)?

    * Global, Fixed intervals, Sliding windows, and Session

>     * Aggregating over windowed PCollections w/GBKs or Combines.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    * Aggregating over windowed PCollections with GroupByKeys or Combines.
```

  * Flatten
  * Partition
  * Composites
  * Cross Language Transforms
* Coders
  * Primitive Go types (ints, string, []bytes, and more)
  * Beam Schemas for Go Struct types (including struct, slice, and map fields)
  * Registering custom coders
* Metrics
  * PCollection metrics (ElementCount, Size Estimates)
  * Custom User Metrics
  * Post job user metrics querying (coming in 2.34.0)
  * DoFn profiling metrics (coming in 2.35.0)

> * Provided Built Transforms
>   * Sum, Count, Min, Max, Top, Filter
>   * Scalable TextIO Reading

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Provided Transforms
  * Sum, Count, Min, Max, Top, Filter
  * Scalable TextIO Reading
```

Or we could go with `Built-in transforms`

Author: Ah that's a typo for sure. Thanks!

Upcoming features support roadmap, and known issues are discussed below.
In particular, we plan to support a much richer set of IO connectors via Beam's cross-language capabilities.

## Releases

With this release, the Go SDK now uses [Go Modules](https://golang.org/ref/mod) for dependency management.

> This makes it so users, SDK Devs, and the testing infrastructure can all rely on the same versions of dependencies, making builds reproducible.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This makes it so users, SDK authors, and the testing infrastructure can all rely on the same versions of dependencies, making builds reproducible.
```

This also makes [validating Go SDK Release Candidates simple](/blog/validate-beam-release/#configuring-a-go-build-to-validate-a-beam-release-candidate).

Versioned SDK worker containers are now built and [published](https://hub.docker.com/r/apache/beam_go_sdk/tags?page=1&ordering=last_updated), with the SDK using matched tagged versions.

> For released versions, user jobs no longer need to specify a container to use, except when using custom containers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
User jobs no longer need to specify a container to use for released versions, except when using custom containers.
```

## Compatibility

The Go SDK will largely follow suit with the Go notion of compatibility.
Some concessions are made to keep all SDKs together on the same release cycle.

### Language Compatibility

The SDK will be tested at a minimum [Go Programming Language version of 1.16](https://golang.org/doc/devel/release), and use available language features and standard library packages accordingly.
To maintain a broad compatibility, the Go SDK will not require the latest major version of Go.
We expect to follow the 2nd newest supported release of the language, with a possible exception when Go 1.18 is released, in order to begin experimenting with [Go Generics](https://go.dev/blog/generics-proposal) in the SDK.
Release notes will call out when the minimum version of the language changes.

### Package Compatibility

The primary user packages will avoid changing in backwards incompatible ways for core features.
This is to be inline with Go's notion of the [`import compatibility rule`](https://research.swtch.com/vgo-import).

> If an old package and a new package have the same import path,
> the new package must be backwards compatible with the old package.

> Exceptions to this policy are around newer, experimental, or in development features.
> These are subject to change.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Exceptions to this policy are around newer, experimental, or in development features and are subject to change.
```

> Such features will have a doc comment noting the experimental status, or be mentioned the change notes for a release.
> For example, using `beam.WindowInto` with Triggers is currently experimental and may have the api changed in a future release.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Such features will have a doc comment noting the experimental status. Major changes will be mentioned in the release notes.
For example, using `beam.WindowInto` with Triggers is currently experimental and may have the API changed in a future release.
```

Primary user packages include:
* The main beam package `github.com/apache/beam/sdks/v2/go/pkg/beam`
* Sub packages under `.../transforms`, `.../io`, `.../runners`, and `.../testing`.

> Generally, packages in the module other than the primary user packages are for framework use.
> They are at risk of changing, though at this point, large breaking changes are unlikely.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Generally, packages in the module other than the primary user packages are for framework use and are at risk of changing.
```

* Current Trigger API is under iteration and subject to change [BEAM-3304](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/BEAM-3304).
  * API has a possible breaking change between 2.33.0 and 2.34.0, and may change again.
* Support of the SDK on services, like Google Cloud Dataflow, remains at the service owner's discretion.
* Need something?
  * File a ticket in the [Beam JIRA](https://issues.apache.org/jira/issues/?jql=project%20%3D%20BEAM%20AND%20component%20%3D%20sdk-go) and,
  * Email the dev@beam.apache.org list!

#### Fixed in 2.34.0
  * `top.SmallestPerKey` was broken [BEAM-12946](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/BEAM-12946)
  * `beam.TryCrossLanguage` API didn't match non-Try version [BEAM-9918](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/BEAM-9918)
    * This is a breaking change if one was calling `beam.TryCrossLanguage`

#### Fixed in 2.35.0
  * Non-Global Window Side Inputs don't match (correctness bug) [BEAM-11087](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/BEAM-11087)
    * Until 2.35.0 it's not recommended to use SideInputs that are not using the Global Window.

>   * Side Inputs using DoFns accumulate memory over bundles, causing OOMs [BEAM-13130](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/BEAM-13130)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * DoFns using Side Inputs accumulate memory over bundles, causing OOMs [BEAM-13130](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/BEAM-13130)
```
